---
layout: post
title: "Advent of Code 2025 - Day 6"
date: 2026-01-07 00:52:53 -0300
lang: en
project-aoc2025: true
permalink: /project/aoc2025-d6.html
---

"Cephalopod math doesn't look that different from normal math."

**Github**: *[GCaggianese/AoC-2025/D6](https://github.com/GCaggianese/AoC-2025/tree/master/D6)*

# Puzzle [Day 6: Trash Compactor](https://adventofcode.com/2025/day/6)

## Part One

-   Parse the input as a matrix using spaces (" ") as separators
-   Do the operator operation (last row) to every column in the same row
-   Sum the results.

## Part 2

Part 2 requires reading the input numbers ****vertically**** instead of
horizontally. Each column position becomes a digit, and digits stack
top-to-bottom to form new numbers. Here is important to denote that
there are spaces with the number inputs too (" 51") as an example, this
matters as when reading vertically will change the indentation,
therefore if it's a part of another number or not.

### Updated Parsing

1.  **Mantain the character positions**
    -   `readdlm` destroys spatial information by treating spaces as
        delimiters. → use `readlines()` and parse characters one by one.
2.  **Expand the header**
    -   The operators row uses spaces to mean "repeat previous
        operator". So `*   +   *   +` expands to `****++++****+++` →
        each column has its operator.
3.  **Read columns vertically**
    -   For each column position, stack the digits from all rows (top to
        bottom).
    -   Concatenate them into a single number.
        -   Spaces within the number grid mean "no digit here".
4.  **Separator columns**
    -   A column whith all cells `" "` means a separator between
        operations.
5.  **Apply operators and sum**
    -   Group consecutive numbers between separators
    -   Apply their operator
    -   Sum all results for the answer.
